---
layout: post
title: Building a Device Lab
author: ajk
excerpt: Back in January, we finally set up a proper device lab, a coordinated organ for all the (mobile) devices we need to test our work. Before this, our testing was all over the place, uncoordinated, confusing, inefficient and caused people to just skip testing with other devices. We had a somewhat-okay array of devices, but nobody knew what they were, or where they were. This is a chronicling of our journey to fix this problem.
---

Back in January, we finally set up a proper device lab, a coordinated organ for all the (mobile) devices we need to test our work. Before this, our testing was all over the place, uncoordinated, confusing, inefficient and caused people to just skip testing with other devices. We had a somewhat- okay array of devices, but nobody knew what they were, or where they were. This is a chronicling of our journey.

### Planning the lab

I realized we had a problem with our test devices and I wanted to fix this. My
plan was to establish a small laboratory within our organization called "Device
lab". The lab would have its own space where you could come and test your work
on the spot &ndash; or take the devices with you (borrow). I self-appointed
myself as the "Head Caretaker of the Device Lab" and recruited two assistants to
aid me. Our tasks would be to dictate lab rules, make sure everything keeps
running smoothly and keep the device lab healthy and up-to-date.

I sent my plans to a few higher-ups. The head of IT was quick to respond. He
simple me to send him a list of devices that we should have at our disposal.
Only a day after this, the first devices arrived on my desk. After a few days, I
had the absolute minimum viable device lab up and running, with a iPhone, iPad
and an Android. After a few more weeks, I had my fantasy roster of devices. I
also acquired a few extras by accident, like a Nokia N900. Given time, I also
got hold of all the devices we already had, but which had been "lost" :)

![First customer of Device Lab, Juha Höyssä, and me, the Head Caretaker of the
Device Lab](/img/device-lab/first-device-lab-user.jpg) <p
class="caption">Lending out the first Lumia device to arrive at the Device
Lab.</p>

### No room to test on-the-spot

Unfortunately, there was no room to place the devices in a way that people can
stay and test their projects on the spot. Thus, the lab isn't actually a lab for
now, but just a shelf near my workstation where people borrow devices from.

!["The lab"](/img/device-lab/the-lab.jpg) <p class="caption">"The Lab"</p>

Borrowing a device is very simple. We use a notebook and a pen. Whenever someone
borrows something, they write down the device(s) they borrowed, their name, the
project and the date they intend to return the device. This way others will know
where the devices are and when will they be back at the lab.

### Summary

That's how we built our device lab. And it works great. People are happy and
complaints about not having test devices are long gone. Our overall software
quality has also gone up, because testing with different devices is easy and
accessible to everyone.

The lab also has an internal wiki page with all the information in it: basic
idea, rules, list of people to contact, and a list of devices with names and
specs.

Oh, yeah! The notebook + pen system isn't without its faults. If you want to
borrow an iPad and it's missing, browsing through the notebook, to see who has
it, is tedious. Instead, I've been thinking about having a single piece of paper
per device and clipping them together. This way people only have to find the
correct paper (very easy) and then look at the latest entry (also easy).

One final note: To keep track of each individual devices, we put name tags on
them. Our IT uses things from film and TV for inspiration in naming things, like
this [list of Pokémons][pokemons], and I wanted to follow this tradition. So,
the devices are named after the [Twilight characters][characters], thus
also spawning a secret alias: "The Twilight Lab".

Special thanks to device lab assistant Juha Höyssä for sparring and doing some
of the device lab chores. Also, big thanks to
[@viljamis](http://twitter.com/viljamis) for establishing the [Helsinki Open
Device Lab](http://devicelab.fi/), which actually gave me the inspiration on how
to solve the problem.

[pokemons]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Pok%C3%A9mon twilight-
[characters]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Twilight_characters
