---
layout: post
title: Gophercon 2023 San Diego
author: cristian.lupascu
excerpt: A blog post about my visit to Gophercon 2023 San Diego, held 25-28.9.2023
tags:
  - Conference
  - Gophercon
  - Go
  - Rust
  - Software architecture
  - Cloud native
  - Programming
---

Last September I had the chance to attend [Gophercon 2023](https://www.gophercon.com/) in San Diego, California. The conference featured a wide range of topics, from home projects, to high-level scalable software designs and abstract maths topics. The conference was absolutely worth the travel effort and jet lag, and I would recommend it to anyone interested in the Go programming language. Here is how it went.

## The travel

The alarm clock rang at exactly 1:00 AM Sunday 23.9.2023. I barely could cook breakfast but soon after I was already headed to Helsinki Airport from Turku university. The queues at the airport were manageable and at 8:00 I departed to London, where a 4 hour long layover would wait me. After a 2 hour delay, I embarked on a 11 hour British Airways flight to San Diego, which would land at 6:00 PM in San Diego (next day 4:00 AM in Helsinki). After a surpisingly short queue at the border control, I took a taxi to the hotel in the iconic Gaslamp Quarter, where I would stay for the next 5 days.

## The venue

Being my first time in the USA, San Diego looked exactly how I imagined California to be: Sunny, lively and full of palm trees and taco stands. The city was surprisingly walkable and very clean, resulting in me racking up more than 15000 steps each day of my stay.

The conference was held in the Mariott Marquis hotel in San Diego Marina, a lovely hotel with a great view of the bay, at roughly 20 minutes walking distance from the Gaslamp Quarter. The conference was held in the hotel's conference halls, which were spacious enough for all the attendees, even though sometimes they got quite crowded and people had to stand up.

## The conference

Monday was very ligth, as the only event was the conference registration and exclusive merch shopping, so I had time to explore the city a bit more. I ended up having lunch at [Kansas City BBQ](https://kcbbq.net/), a restaurant famous for being featured in the movie Top Gun.

Tuesday was workshop day for who bought additional workshop tickets. I have attended two workshops: Supercharged microservices with NATS in the morning and Introduction to Rust in the afternoon.

Wednesday and Thursday were the main conference days, split into two parallel tracks. Between the talks it was possible to visit the sponsor stands, where the sponsors would give away swag and talk about their products. Among the sponsors, Jetbrains, Google and Buf had the best stands, but not the coolest gadgets!

### Supercharged microservices with NATS

This 4 hour workshop was held by [Jeremy Saez](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jeremy-saenz-956a809/), senior software enginner at Synadia. The workshop was a hands-on introduction to [NATS](https://nats.io/), a high performance messaging system, built with scalability and clustering in mind. The workshop was very well structured, starting with the basics and ending with a more complex example of a distributed system. The workshop was divided in 4 one hour long sessions which included theory and hands-on exercises. I attended this workshop as my customer work is using NATS heavily and being taught by a very knowledgeable person helped me a lot in *upping my game*. 

The best part of the workshop was using the [micro](https://github.com/nats-io/nats.go/blob/main/micro/README.md) package, which allows to create microservices that communicate through NATS, and have builtin observability and load balancing. 

The main takes from the workshop were:

1. NATS is very simple in nature, but allows for very complex distributed systems that span multiple geographical regions
2. NATS is very fast, with a single server being able to handle roughly 1 million messages per second in the best scenario
3. A NATS server can be started in seconds, and configured easily with a simple configuration file
4. NATS is written in Go, and has client libraries for most programming languages
5. NATS `micro` allows to spawn microservices in Go, simplifying the development of microservice heavy systems

### Introduction to Rust

**Wait what? A Rust workshop at a Go conference?** This is the question everyone asked when enrolling in the workshop, as the developer community is very polarized between the two languages. I enrolled in the workshop mainly to learn *the other side of the fence*.

After a generous Mexican lunch I attended the introduction to Rust 4 hour-long workshop, held by [Herbert Wolverson](https://www.linkedin.com/in/herbert-wolverson-98523346/), Rust trainer at Ardan Labs. His workshop was very good introduction to the Rust world, starting from the basics to the creation of a small HTTP server git repository template. The workshop was divided in units, where each unit would build on top of the previous ones.

I felt the workshop was too fast paced, so that I could not fully grasp the concepts before moving on to the next one, even though afterwards I revisited the notes I had taken and everything made sense, but I understand that Rust is a complex language and was is hard to fit everything in a 4 hour workshop.

My main takes from the workshop were:

1. Rust is complex, but once grasped it is a very powerful language
2. Rust's compiler is one of the strictes I have seen, and the error messages are the best I have ever seen
3. Rust's borrow checker is a powerful tool, but it takes time to get used to it
4. Rust's `async`/`await` is very similar to Go's `goroutines` and `channels`

### The talks

Wednesday I followed the following talks:

- *Idiomatic Go tells a story* by Kaylyn Gibilterra
- *Reliably Absorbing a Go Release: Learnings from the Kubernetes Community* by Madhav Jivrajani
- *Understanding Supply Chain Threats with Static Analysis* by Jess McClintock
- *Balanced GC: A Copying Garbage Collector for Golang* by Yifei Zhang
- *Special When Lit: Using Go to Bring a Pinball Machine Back to Life!* by Jeremy Fleitz
- *Building a Highly Concurrent Cache in Go: A Hitchhiker's Guide* by Konrad Reiche
- *Blazing Fast Merge with Loser Trees* by Bryan Boreham
- *Closing Keynote: Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Type Inference* by Robert Griesemer

Not all of them were equally interesting, but I enjoyed the talks by Kaylyn Gibilterra, Jess McClintock, Jeremy Fleitz and Konrad Reiche the most.